It would be fragile and difficult to try to enumerate precisely when values escape: the algorithm itself is fairly sophisticated and changes between Go releases. For more details on how to identify which values escape and which do not, see the section oneliminating heap allocations.\nTracing Garbage Collection\nGarbage collection may refer to many different methods of automatically recycling memory; for example, reference counting. In the context of this document, garbage collection refers to tracing garbage collection, which identifies in-use, so-called live, objects by following pointers transitively.\nLet's define these terms more rigorously.\nObject—An object is a dynamically allocated piece of memory that contains one or more Go values.\nPointer—A memory address that references any value within an object. This naturally includes Go values of the form *T, but also includes parts of built-in Go values. Strings, slices, channels, maps, and interface values all contain memory addresses that the GC must trace.\nTogether, objects and pointers to other objects form the object graph. To identify live memory, the GC walks the object graph starting at the program's roots, pointers that identify objects that are definitely in-use by the program. Two examples of roots are local variables and global variables. The process of walking the object graph is referred to as scanning. Another phrase you might see in the Go documentation is whether an object isreachable, which just means that the object can be discovered by the scanning process. Note also that, with one exception, once memory becomes unreachable, it stays unreachable.\nThis basic algorithm is common to all tracing GCs. Where tracing GCs differ is what they do once they discover memory is live. Go's GC uses the mark-sweep technique, which means that in order to keep track of its progress, the GC also marks the values it encounters as live. Once tracing is complete, the GC then walks over all memory in the heap and makes all memory that is not marked available for allocation. This process is called sweeping.\nOne alternative technique you may be familiar with is to actually move the objects to a new part of memory and leave behind a forwarding pointer that is later used to update all the application's pointers. We call a GC that moves objects in this way a moving GC; Go has anon-moving GC.\nThe GC cycle\nBecause the Go GC is a mark-sweep GC, it broadly operates in two phases: the mark phase, and the sweep phase. While this statement might seem tautological, it contains an important insight: it's not possible to release memory back to be allocated until allmemory has been traced, because there may still be an un-scanned pointer keeping an object alive. As a result, the act of sweeping must be entirely separated from the act of marking. Furthermore, the GC may also not be active at all, when there's no GC-related work to do. The GC continuously rotates through these three phases of sweeping, off, and marking in what's known as the GC cycle. For the purposes of this document, consider the GC cycle starting with sweeping, turning off, then marking.\nThe next few sections will focus on building intuition for the costs of the GC to aid users in tweaking GC parameters for their own benefit.\nUnderstanding costs\nThe GC is inherently a complex piece of software built on even more complex systems. It's easy to become mired in detail when trying to understand the GC and tweak its behavior. This section is intended to provide a framework for reasoning about the cost of the Go GC and its tuning parameters.\nTo begin with, consider this model of GC cost based on three simple axioms.\nThe GC involves only two resources: physical memory, and CPU time.\nThe GC's memory costs consist of live heap memory, new heap memory allocated before the mark phase, and space for metadata that, even if proportional to the previous costs, are small in comparison. This guide is intended to aid advanced Go users in better understanding their application costs by providing insights into the Go garbage collector. It also provides guidance on how Go users may use these insights to improve their applications' resource utilization. It does not assume any knowledge of garbage collection, but does assume familiarity with the Go programming language.\nThe Go language takes responsibility for arranging the storage of Go values; in most cases, a Go developer need not care about where these values are stored, or why, if at all. In practice, however, these values often need to be stored in computer physical memoryand physical memory is a finite resource. Because it is finite, memory must be managed carefully and recycled in order to avoid running out of it while executing a Go program. It's the job of a Go implementation to allocate and recycle memory as needed.\nAnother term for automatically recycling memory is garbage collection. At a high level, a garbage collector (or GC, for short) is a system that recycles memory on behalf of the application by identifying which parts of memory are no longer needed. The Go standard toolchain provides a runtime library that ships with every application, and this runtime library includes a garbage collector.\nNote that the existence of a garbage collector as described by this guide is not guaranteed by the Go specification, only that the underlying storage for Go values is managed by the language itself. This omission is intentional and enables the use of radically different memory management techniques.\nTherefore, this guide is about a specific implementation of the Go programming language and may not apply to other implementations. Specifically, this following guide applies to the standard toolchain (the gcGo compiler and tools). Gccgo and Gollvm both use a very similar GC implementation so many of the same concepts apply, but details may vary.\nFurthermore, this is a living document and will change over time to best reflect the latest release of Go. This document currently describes the garbage collector as of Go 1.19.\nWhere Go Values Live\nBefore we dive into the GC, let's first discuss the memory that doesn't need to be managed by the GC.\nFor instance, non-pointer Go values stored in local variables will likely not be managed by the Go GC at all, and Go will instead arrange for memory to be allocated that's tied to thelexical scope in which it's created. In general, this is more efficient than relying on the GC, because the Go compiler is able to predetermine when that memory may be freed and emit machine instructions that clean up. Typically, we refer to allocating memory for Go values this way as \"stack allocation,\" because the space is stored on the goroutine stack.\nGo values whose memory cannot be allocated this way, because the Go compiler cannot determine its lifetime, are said to escape to the heap. \"The heap\" can be thought of as a catch-all for memory allocation, for when Go values need to be placed somewhere. The act of allocating memory on the heap is typically referred to as \"dynamic memory allocation\" because both the compiler and the runtime can make very few assumptions as to how this memory is used and when it can be cleaned up. That's where a GC comes in: it's a system that specifically identifies and cleans up dynamic memory allocations.\nThere are many reasons why a Go value might need to escape to the heap. One reason could be that its size is dynamically determined. Consider for instance the backing array of a slice whose initial size is determined by a variable, rather than a constant. Note that escaping to the heap must also be transitive: if a reference to a Go value is written into another Go value that has already been determined to escape, that value must also escape. Whether a Go value escapes or not is a function of the context in which it is used and the Go compiler's escape analysis algorithm.\n GC memory cost for cycle N = live heap from cycle N-1 + new heap Live heap memory is memory that was determined to be live by the previous GC cycle, while new heap memory is any memory allocated in the current cycle, which may or may not be live by the end. How much memory is live at any given point in time is a property of the program, and not something the GC can directly control.\nThe GC's CPU costs are modeled as a fixed cost per cycle, and a marginal cost that scales proportionally with the size of the live heap. GC CPU time for cycle N = Fixed CPU time cost per cycle + average CPU time cost per byte * live heap memory found in cycle N The fixed CPU time cost per cycle includes things that happen a constant number of times each cycle, like initializing data structures for the next GC cycle. This cost is typically small, and is included just for completeness. Most of the CPU cost of the GC is marking and scanning, which is captured by the marginal cost. The average cost of marking and scanning depends on the GC implementation, but also on the behavior of the program. For example, more pointers means more GC work, because at minimum the GC needs to visit all the pointers in the program. Structures like linked lists and trees are also more difficult for the GC to walk in parallel, increasing the average cost per byte. This model ignores sweeping costs, which are proportional to total heap memory, including memory that is dead (it must be made available for allocation). For Go's current GC implementation, sweeping is so much faster than marking and scanning that the cost is negligible in comparison.\nThis model is simple but effective: it accurately categorizes the dominant costs of the GC. It also tells us that the total CPU cost of the garbage collector depends on the total number of GC cycles in a given time frame. Finally, embedded in this model is a fundamental time/space trade-off for the GC.